The Joe Rogan experience. Um,
but to share that with everybody nationally in my world,
in the thing green line,
and for them to start having it happening on their refuges,
and even just to know this,
stuff's getting back to their parts of the world and poisoning their,
their cannabis users, you know, unsuspectingly horrible information, right.
But we need to know it. And a lot of guys didn't know it.
And so that was one thing to see, Hey, we need to have a baseline training.
And the way we do it here in California is we all go through a really stringent
academy. Everyone gets their basic tools, arrest control, and defensive tactics,
you know, and firearms training and all of that,
and get good at being the traditional game board and doing all the traditional
stuff. And they get, you know, know, get, get their feet wet out,
doing their own thing for a couple years.
And then we start to find the people that have the motivation or want to get
onto a specialized unit,
like our met team or one of the watershed teams or the wildlife trafficking
team. Very seldomly do we put a fresh person there because you know,
I think to really be a good game warden, you gotta cut your teeth,
all the traditional stuff. That's critical of just having to,
having to check guys with guns all the time. You know,
most cops look at that and go, that's crazy. I mean,
everybody you check has a knife or a firearm. Yeah. Well,
fortunately 99% of 'em are guys like you and me that wanna see a game warden and
game war wants to see us, but for the one felon,
that's on parole and he's in the woods hiding. And we run across that a lot.
And I, I run across a ton of that down here in SoCal,
really at the start of my career.
And I've got some interesting stories about that, but so guys who are like,
they skip bail and then they go and hide. Yep.
And they've got like a no bail warrant they're wanted on some warrant somewhere.
And so they're off fishing. They have an illegal firearm.
Maybe they're a felon in possession of a firearm. They can't even have of,
and now they're out in a remote area where no cops gonna find me here.
And then I'm the new game warden in Riverside county, you know,
all fricking motivated, really green. I don't know totally what I'm doing yet.
Right.
And I'm in that truck cruising and something I got into down here that was just
crazy, but I will say this, it was a heck of a learning curve and I'm,
I'm really blessed. It went out the way it did and it was, I was safe in it,
but, um, we would get gang bangers from, from LA here.
And they would go over into Riverside county and get into my kind of rural,
you know, foothills and on the edge of the national forest.
And they'd have AK 47 S and they'd have, you know,
automatic pistols and they would spotlight through these canyons gunning for
everything. They'd kill rabbits, they'd kill coyot. They kill deer.
They get to the end of like a canyon that has like a, an outlet of a dam,
throw a gillnet out and spend all night there,
just gillnetting fish and hunting freely and shooting,
killing everything with their spotlights, grab their gillnet,
grab hunters of fish pack up, and then head back, you know,
back to the LA basin, gang bangers. I'm not kidding.
And like craziest part fishing, gang bangers. Yeah. Commercial,
almost commercial fishing does it does. It sounds nuts. Right. So strange.
And what would they do with the fish? Oh, they'd eat 'em maybe they'd sell 'em.
You know, who knows? Usually with quantities that big, they were getting sold.
But the thing that was crazy is I would be, you know, alone, I'd be in my truck.
I didn't have a canine yet, you know? And now I just, uh, I just retired with,
well, like you're a Marshall, I have Apollo yellow lab, English lab.
She's amazing. Never gonna bite a bad guy,
but she's gonna lick him to death and try to try to, you know, uh,
turn 'em all away. Um,
but I didn't even have a companion dog at the time and I would go and run into
these guys and go, okay, this is to what I learned in the academy that you know,
that, that head on spotlighting stop that you never want to have,
or getting behind him, blacked out and tracking 'em down. Um,
and next thing I know I got AKs and I got all these freaking prohibited,
exotic weapons, and I'm going, this is crazy. I'm pulling these guys out alone.
I don't have a lot of, so it was just you. It.
Was just me. How many guys.
Did you run into sometimes B two, one night.
I pulled like eight people out of a van. Oh. And I was alone. Oh.
And they were all armed. And it was one of my heaviest, most intense cases.
And I had been on one year, so this was 1994.
And what we were doing in the Riverside squad is we were just saturating the
area. Cause we were getting everybody from over in the LA side here,
spotlight and all our G aim. So we like, okay, let's saturate this.
And back then, Joe,
the game was to catch a spotlight or red handed cuz they're so deliberate.
Explain spotlight to.
A lot. People listen to.
Yeah, yeah, I should, I should have done that.
But spotlighting is where you use an artificial light,
whether it's a handheld spotlight, a flashlight, whatever.
And you go into remote areas and you look to find animals at night because they
freeze. They're really relaxed, their eyes glow. And then you shoot,
'em that way you kill 'em illegally at night after dark, which is never allowed,
you know, it's usually in or outta hunting season.
Cause anyone's gonna spotlight a deer nine times outta 10 they're they're not
licensed or they're not gonna do it during season. Like we do. Um,
so they're doing that. So in the, in our world as game wardens,
that's the ultimate all life criminal because they're gonna kill doze. You know,
that, that have that unborn trophy buck for good genetics.
They're gonna kill a trophy deer way in the rut, you know, that, you know,
needs to go another year or whatever. Um,
so that's what we focused on that was like, if I can cut my teeth and get,
you know, become a, a, a reputable game war and of going after the hardcores,
that was the game then.
So it was 94 and I'm these guys out and calling 'em out on a loud speaker.
I've got my weapon on 'em and I'm like, oh man, there's a lot of guys out there.
I can't get 'em to jail. I'm calling back up. I got Riverside county coming in.
I mean, we even have the, the,
the Sheriff's office helicopter come in several nights.
Once we got to know each other and they realized who is this game warden?
And what are these game wars,
Riverside county going out into just crazy areas by themself,
they'd monitor our traffic and they'd come in on the helicopter and light it up
and call 'em, you know,
call these bad guys out on loud speakers just to make sure we were okay.
And it feels good when the calary comes on those nights, man, let me tell you,
well, so's crazy.
In those sort of situations,
they just didn't know that you would ever run into someone that's that arm,
that many guys yeah. In the van or what have you eight people it's.
So the reason why you're patrolling by yourself is cause they didn't anticipate
anything like this.
Well, and we didn't have the bodies, right?
This was one of the things that was crazy.
We get back to the thin green line concept and realize that one game warden is
responsible for 200 to 250 square miles,
give or take whoa.
And you know how big Riverside county is on the inline empire empire,
200 square miles, maybe more, you know, depending on what part of game,
game warden, one game warden.
So a squad of seven game wardens to put it in perspective,
check this out brother. So when I was supervising traditional patrol,
before we started the special op met team in Santa Clara CA county,
we always had vacancies because we always low on bodies.
We couldn't hire game wardens, fast enough.
We weren't funded for it or where the case may be.
So we might have four or five game wardens for seven positions.
And we had to cover all of Santa Clara county,
which is everything from the city to all those foothills.
And there's a lot of it in Silicon valley. People don't realize
all of San bonnito can county, which is huge Hollister Gilroy, right,
where I'm from in Gilroy,
that whole area down to the south that is just massive mountain country full of
wildlife. Um, and then like part of Monterey county.
And I had five people in myself as a Lieutenant that is insane.
And I can't believe that. So to go out on a spotlighting patrol to that point,
um, and have a partner with you, just one other game warden, that's tough.
You know, you're basically pulling a whole nother area.
You can't work night hunters. So is spotlighting that common. It,
it is still going on in the state and it's going on a lot. Um,
back then here,
because there had been so little presence here in Southern California,
it was off the hook. It was crazy one week in 9, 18 94.
I remember I was, uh, I had a really good ride along with me,
a wildlife biologist, just a savvy hunter, great eyes.
He became kind of like my right hand, man, Brian. Um, and we,
I said, we're gonna catch a spotlight every night, this week. He goes,
you think? So I go, it's that crazy? Let's see if we can do it.
And so we went and worked all night long. We started on Monday night.
How do you catch 'em? Do you look for a spotlight?
Like what do you get to a vantage point glass it's yeah.
It's just like glass in a big basin for elk. Right? Right.
You get in a really good Overwatch that you get the most visibility, you know,
hide the truck and um, you watch and you find areas where it's likely to happen.
And it, it takes a while to learn where that's gonna be,
just because you got the huge district and you could have 20 places where guys
spotlight,
but until you get into the area as a new warden and really get to figure it all
out, you don't know where to be. And it's a trial and error, but you know,
it took me six months. Give or take of just,
just going out there and scouting hard and, and seeing where this road goes.
And how does that canyon look? What type of water do I have down there?
What am I seeing at low light in the evening when animals are coming to water?
Ooh, I got a whole herd of elk here. I got a whole herd of deer.
I got some bucks, you know, I'm seeing other animals run around.
This is gonna be a hotspot because guys can get to it.
And if you just put the time in, you just kind of lie and wait, you know,
kind of put your little hide together. Um, just like hunting a big game.
Eventually it starts happening.
And by 1994 and I've been in district a year down here,
I pretty much had my spots figured out my partners and other parts of Riverside
did too.
So we'd all be out alone so we could cover more area and talking back and forth.
I mean, and I'm gonna date myself here, but cell phones are brand new.
So we all had those flip cell phones and we were, how old are you? Uh,
I'm gonna be 51 in November. I'm.
52. Yeah. We about it. No, no. Yeah.
<Laugh> so we're right there. You know, all that era. So when I started, I mean,
it was the flip phone, you know, let's start track communicator. Sure.
Calling my partner, Jerry, like, I love those. Where are you at? They're great.
I'm like, where are you at? He goes, I'm over here in Thomas mountain. I'm like,
I'm over here. You see anything yet? I go, I got one light working. I gotta go.
And then all go.
So, but that's crazy. Like you're talking about enormous pieces of land. Oh,
it's that you guys are responsible for. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, for,
it's hard for people to put into perspective that don't spend any time in the
woods, right.
That you would be able to even find these folks in this enormous area. Yeah.
Yeah.
It's starts off as a needle in haystack type thing, you know,
but once you get into it, you get fairly good at it, but it,
it always is difficult because again,
just the percentages of catching a guy on the right night that he's gonna be out
there.
And then you got the guys that kind of get savvy to knowing where the game war
lives, driving by his house,
looking for his patrol truck to see if he's out that night.
Whereas the truck parked. Wow. We start getting into that problem. Oh wow.
So we always kind of, you know, kind of maintain as cover as we can, you know,
we're known in the neighborhood and the thing is we live at home.
We work out of our homes, home office.
We're close to our community because if we kept our truck at a field office,
we'd have no response time, all spread out.
So we get very community oriented in,
in community functions and conservation groups. And everybody knows us rather,
it's a big city or a small little town in the mountains.
So you got guys doing the cat and mouse thing, looking for us and you know,
making sure, Hey, is this truck there or is he out pet patrolling? Well,
maybe I won't go out tonight. Mm. Um, but, but that, that era Joe in,
in 1994 was, was off the hook. I,
I didn't get a spotlight every night that week,
but I got six outta seven and one night I had a double. So it was crazy. Wow.
And seasoned a ton of guns. And you know, some guys were going to jail,
some weren't, um,
but a lot of wildlife was saved that night because they would've, they would,
would've done a lot of harm.
You know, you know, most of these guys,
are they doing this recreationally for fun? Are they're doing it for food? Like,
what are.
They the, the group I was getting into down here, it was, it was recreational.
It might have been to sell the meat. I couldn't prove that.
Or it was just to go kill stuff. Um, you do get it, people that need meat,
you know,
that do spotlight after dark because they need the meat and stuff like that.
Mm-hmm <affirmative>, and it's still a violation. We still deal with it as such.
But if we ascertain that, we're gonna be fair about it. You know, we said, okay,
look, you're poaching. I know you're starving. It's outta season.
It's in season, you have a tag, but you just really gotta get that meat. I mean,
there are certain cases where you just kind of feel for that person to go.
Right. I see where the motivation was, you know,
and a very small percentage of poachers are that way, but some of them are just,
you know, they're just trying to feed their family. Right. And they're,
it's a whole different game and we're, we're gonna be fair about it.
Or we should be fair about it were.
Most of em, gang bangers or most of em criminals, like, what is it?
Was there a down here.
Average here, 70, 80%. Yeah.
Had criminal histories had illegal weapons associated with gangs. So.
It was almost like recreation for them.
It almost was. That was like what practice. Yeah. Yeah.
And I remember one case down here that was a pretty crazy one. It was,
it was three guys, pretty inebriated, pretty liquored up. And, um,
it was a head on stop. And one of them had a, uh, like a $50,000,
no bail warrant for cocaine trafficking outta Mexico. Jesus.
And that was in that week that we had, you know,
crazy spotlight and things going on.
So it was just the demographic of down here where up north that into
it wouldn't be necessarily that felon,
but that guy that just wanted that trophy buck and to get it cheap, to get it.